# Getting started

- Author(s): Bhathiya Perera

## Setting things up
### Downloading

* Head to [releases](https://github.com/YakshaLang/Yaksha/releases)
* Pick an archive format you like `.7z` or `.zip` (both has same content and `.7z` is almost always likely to be smaller in size)
* Since this is a new language we recommend you always download latest version. Please expect things to not work.

### Installing

* After download is completed you can extract the archive. Here are few ways:
  - Windows: use [7zip application](https://www.7-zip.org/)
  - GNU/Linux: use `7za` or `unzip` depending on archive format.
* Now you can add `bin` directory to PATH.
* If you are in GNU/Linux ensure that binaries in the `bin` directory have `+x` (executable) permission assigned. `chmod +x *`

### Basics of Yaksha Programming Language

#### Hello World

Steps:

First save below code to a file named "hello.yaka"

```yaksha
def main() -> int:
    println("Hello World!")
    return 0
```

In Yaksha we use `.yaka` extension for source files. Also, we use `->` to denote return type of a function.
Additionally entry point of a program is `main` function. Main function must always return an `int` value. In this case we return `0` to indicate that program has exited successfully. Additionally we use `println` builtin function to print a line to standard output.

Now you can compile it using `yaksha` command.

```bash
yaksha build -R hello.yaka
```

Internally `yaksha build` command will invoke `carpntr` binary included in the distribution. `carpntr` is the builder tool for Yaksha. It will compile the source file and generate a binary named `hello` in the current directory. Additionally it will generate a `hello.c` file which is the C code generated by the compiler. You can inspect this file to see how the compiler works. `-R` option for `carpntr` (or `yaksha build`) will execute the binary after compilation.

`carpntr` (or `yaksha build`) has many options. You can see them by running `yaksha build --help` or `carpntr --help`. Under the hood `carpntr` uses bundled `zig` compiler (with `zig cc`) and compile `c` code to a binary.

#### Data types

Yaksha has many data types. Here are few of them:

- `int`: 32 bit signed integer (Examples: `1`, `100i32`)
- `float`: 32 bit floating point number (Examples: `1.0f`, `100.0f`)
- `bool`: boolean value (Examples: `True`, `False`)
- `str`: partially memory managed string type. (You need to cleanup if you assign to a struct/class or into an array) (Examples: `"Hello World!"`, `"""Hello World!"""`)
- `None`: represents `NULL` value or `void`

You can find more data types and how to use them in the documentation. Since this is a tutorial we will not cover them here.

About `str`:

`str` is a partially memory managed string type. This means that if you just use `str` without assigning it to `struct/class/arrays` or any other data structures you don't need to worry about memory management. However, if you do, you need to cleanup. `str` implementation uses lot of copying and deletions. This is not the most efficient way to do things. However, it is the easiest way to do things. 

About `None`:

`None` compiles to either `NULL` or `void` depending on the context. You can use `None` to indicate that a function does not `return` anything. You can also compare heap structures with `None` to check if they are `NULL`.

#### Builtin functions

Out of the box Yaksha has many builtin functions. Builtin functions compile to various things, therefore they cannot be referenced to create `Function[...]` variables. 

Here are few of them:

- `println`: prints a line to standard output
- `print`: prints to standard output (no line ending)

#### Variables

#### Statements
