---
title: Add minimal support for a HTTP client in Yaksha
author: Bhathiya Perera
layout: '../../layouts/YamaPostLayout.astro'
---

# YAMA 0011 - Add minimal support for a HTTP client in Yaksha

- Author(s): Bhathiya Perera
- Status   : 🟡

## Summary
All programming languages provide a way to make HTTP requests. However, this is currently not available to Yaksha. This proposal aims to add minimal support for HTTP requests to Yaksha.

## Design

We plan on using mongoose to implement this feature. Mongoose is a lightweight HTTP server written in C. It is easy to integrate. However, it's license is GPL and users of http library will have to be aware of this.

## Client

Simple HTTP client will use following structure. This will be placed in a separate module called `http/client.yaka`.


```yaksha
# Mongoose mgr data structure
@nativedefine("struct mg_mgr")
stuct MongooseMgr:
    pass

# Mongoose connection data structure
@nativedefine("struct mg_connection")
struct MongooseCon:
    pass

# HTTP client data structure using above 2 structs
struct HttpClient:
    mgr: MongooseMgr
    nc: Ptr[MongooseCon]
    success: bool

def http_client(url: sr) -> HttpClient:
    pass  # placeholder

def request(method: sr, url: sr, data: sr, callback: Function[..]) -> HttpRequest:
    pass  # placeholder
```

Usage of the client will be as follows:

```yaksha
import http.client as client

def callback(...): # placeholder
    pass

def main() -> int:
    cl = client.http_client("http://localhost:8080")
    cl.request("GET", "/api/v1/users", "", callback)
    defer free_http_client(cl)
    return 0
```

## Required changes to Yaksha ecosystem

* Implement ability to support fixed sized arrays in `Yaksha` (parser, compiler, etc). 
* Implement ability in `YakshaLisp` to execute programs and access output.
* Implement ability in `carpntr` to use `YakshaLisp` to build programs. (Either use program execution ability or use `make/cmake` to build programs)
* Implement ability in `YakshaLisp` to detect platform and use appropriate build system.
* CI - Add ability to build `Yaksha` release on supported platforms using github actions. (Instead of cross compiling)
* Remove `hammer` and just use `cmake` to build `Yaksha`.
* Update build and other scripts accordingly.

## Third party libraries to be included
* `mongoose` - for making HTTP requests
* `mbedtls` - for TLS support
* `reproc` - for executing programs
